NCFE Level 3 Certificate in Cyber Security Practices
Unit 2: Threat intelligence in cyber security
Section 1: Understanding cyber threat intelligence

Slide 1
What you’ll learn
Welcome to Section 1: Understanding cyber threat intelligence
During this Section, you will cover the following assessment criteria:
1.1 Identify key concepts of cyber threat intelligence.
1.2 Explain the following terms in relation to cyber security: threats, exploits, vulnerabilities, risks.
1.3 Describe the threat intelligence lifecycle.
1.4 Describe how to find out about emerging attack techniques and how to recognise them.
1.5 Consider what could be included in Open Source Intelligence data sets.
1.6 Explain why it is important to only use reliable and valid sources of Open Source Intelligence information.
1.7 Explain the importance of using reliable sources of information in relation to cyber security threats.
1.8 Consider the current threat status and make possible recommendations based upon cyber threat intelligence information.
1.9 Analyse relevant cyber threat intelligence information requirements for an organisation.

Slide 2
Key concepts of cyber threat intelligence
A cyber threat is when there is a possibility of a malicious attempt to damage, disrupt or steal from a computer or other device, network or system.
Cyber threat intelligence is the process of collecting, processing and analysing information regarding cyber threats.
There are three main types of cyber threat intelligence. Click the flashcards below to learn more.

Flashcard 1
Operational threat intelligence
This includes tools, techniques and procedures that aim to understand threat actors and their likely attacks.

Flashcard 2
Tactical threat intelligence
Information about the current techniques, tactics and procedures (TTP’s) used by threat actors.

Flashcard 3
Strategic threat intelligence
Information about changes in the threat landscape, for example, information that a new type of threat has emerged, or may emerge.

Slide 3
Progress check
Can you identify the different types of cyber threat intelligence? Use the numbered dropdown options on the right to match the definitions to the correct cyber threat intelligence.

1. Information about changes in the threat landscape, for example, information that a new type of threat has emerged, or may emerge.
Correct answer: Strategic threat intelligence

2. This includes tools, techniques and procedures that aim to understand threat actors and their likely attacks.
Correct answer: Operational threat intelligence

3. Information about the current techniques, tactics and procedures (TTP’s) used by threat actors.
Correct answer: Tactical threat intelligence

Slide 4
Key terms relating to cyber security
Click the buttons to learn about some key terms relating to cyber security.

Button 1
Threats
In cyber security, a ‘threat’ is when there is a possibility of a malicious attempt to damage, disrupt or steal from a computer or other device, network or system.
Threats can include malicious software, data breaches and denial of service (DoS) attacks.

Button 2
Exploits
An exploit is a piece of code that is designed to take advantage of a software vulnerability or security flaw.

Button 3
Vulnerabilities
Types of vulnerability can include:
Software flaws, including bugs or backdoors.
Normal features which can be misused by attackers.
User error.
Zero-day exploit or attack.

Button 4
Risks
Risk is a combination of threat, vulnerability and impact.

Slide 5
The threat intelligence lifecycle
The intelligence cycle is the process by which threat intelligence is identified, collected and then developed into finished plans. Click the buttons on the diagram to learn about the stages in the lifecycle.

Button 1
1. Planning and direction
In this step, cyber security professionals determine what type of intelligence is needed to prevent and counter the threat of attacks (planning).

Button 2
2. Collection
Gathering information about current or future threats from different threat intelligence sources.

Button 3
3. Processing
Processing raw data into a format that can be more easily analysed, such as by using spreadsheets, decrypting files, and evaluating the data for relevance and reliability.

Button 4
4. Analysis
Analysing the data, using different tools and techniques to see if the organisation’s systems have been compromised.

Button 5
5. Dissemination
A threat intelligence report will be created and sent to the person (or people) in charge of deciding what actions to take.

Button 6
6. Feedback
After the report is reviewed, the decision makers will decide if it addresses the issues, what to do about them, and what steps needs to be taken next.

Slide 6
Recognising emerging attack techniques
Effective cyber security involves combining information from different sources to put together a more complete picture of current and emerging threats. Click the numbered buttons below to learn about some commonly used sources of information.

Button 1
Indicators of compromise (IOCs)
Unusual activities on computer log entries or files.
Unusual network traffic.
Large numbers of requests for the same file.
Bundles of data in the wrong place.
Mobile device profile changes.

Button 2
Deep web
Member-only hacking forums.
Private social media pages.
Video on demand.
Web forums that require registration.
Sites protected by paywalls.

Button 3
Dark web
Peer-to-peer networks.
Botnets.
Bitcoin services.
Darknet markets.
Hacking groups.

Button 4
Messaging platforms
WhatsApp.
Wire.
Dust.
CYPHR.

Button 5
Social media
Instagram.
WeChat.
YouTube.
Facebook.
Twitter.

Button 6
Malware analysis
Analyse malware software.
Darknet markets.
Hacking groups.
Cyber security industry bulletins.

Button 7
Geopolitical developments
Trade disputes.
Upcoming elections.
Conflicts.

Button 8
Exploit databases
Kali Linus.
Exploit Database.
Google Hacking Database.
ISS X-Force Database.
Open Source Vulnerability Database.

Button 9
Paste sites
Pastebin.
ControlC.
Ghostbin.
Rentry.co.
ZeroBin.

Button 10
Information sharing platforms
UK National Cyber Security Centre’s Cyber Security Information Sharing Partnership.
Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center.
AlienVault’s Open Threat Exchange.
United States Computer Emergency Response Team’s Automated Indicator Sharing Platform.
Asia Pacific Intelligence Centre.

Slide 7
Progress check
Test your knowledge of emerging attack techniques by having a go at these True or False questions:

1. Unusual activities, unusual traffic and data in the wrong place are all indicators of compromise.
Correct answer: True

2. WhatsApp, Dust and CYPHR are all part of the dark web.
Correct answer: False

3. The term ‘geopolitical developments’ can relate to events such as trade disputes and elections.
Correct answer: True

Slide 8
Open source intelligence data sets
Key term: ‘OSINT’ is a commonly used abbreviation for open source intelligence. Another abbreviation that you may come across is ‘SOCMINT’. This is short for social media intelligence.
Open source intelligence (OSINT) is information that comes from sources that are available to the general public.
There are different software tools and websites that can be used to filter and organise the information. Some of these tools are free, and others are paid for services.
Click the button below to learn more about sources of OSINT data.

Button
Sources of OSINT data
Sources of OSINT data include:
Anything published on the Internet.
News media.
Online media.
Non-media literature.
GPS data.
Publicly-available records.
Public social media posts.
Census data.
Publicly-available malware repositories and exploit databases.
Information that can be found using searches or publicly-available tools.
Dark web and deep web sources.

Slide 9
OSINT case study
Case Study 1: Manufacturing capacity
The manufacturer of a travel mug claims on its website that it produces 1,000 mugs per week. Client Jones is interested in learning more about the company’s production capacity and hires an analyst to determine the accuracy of such claims.
Where could the analyst search for OSINT information?
Consider the question and then click the button below to reveal the answer.

Button
Check answer
Answer: The analyst could gather OSINT/SOCMINT business intelligence from the company’s Facebook page – perhaps showing photos of the machine used and researching how many mugs that machine can make. They could search for information on whether the company is producing travel mugs at an offsite location.

Slide 10
OSINT case study
Case Study 2: Source of wealth
Sally, a bookkeeper for the mug company, earns a £30,000 annual salary with little show of other wealth or income. Suddenly, Sally’s appearance begins to change. She arrives to the office wearing £500 shoes and £800 handbags. She buys a new Maserati.
Where could the analyst search for OSINT information about where Sally got the money?
Consider the question and then click the button below to reveal the answer.

Button
Check answer
Answer: A review of Sally’s social media could be conducted to see if she mentions a recently deceased relative or winnings at a casino. Public records could be searched to find out if she has recently been divorced and received a settlement, or received a legal payout.

Slide 11
Reliable and valid sources of OSINT information
Key term: ‘Open source intelligence’ (OSINT) is information that comes from sources that are available to the general public.
The use of inaccurate data can mean that you are wasting time in searching through invalid sources, and will not find information that will be useful to you.
Click the icons below to learn more about the consequences of using inaccurate data.

Icon 1
Organisations
For an organisation, using inaccurate sources of information can lead to serious legal issues, such as being accused of defamation or libel, or paying large fines for breaches of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) laws.

Icon 2
Social media
Any attempts to access private social media must also comply with the privacy laws, or they may be in breach of the rights of the subject.

Icon 3
Legal consequences
OSINT intelligence gathering is subject to the UK General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and any organisation using OSINT must make sure that they comply with GDPR laws.

Slide 12
OSINT case study
Take a look at this real life example of not using reliable OSINT.
Smith v Trafford Housing Trust
Smith was demoted in his job after he posted a comment on his Facebook page about gay marriage. The court found that he had been wrongfully dismissed and he was awarded damages.
Consider the consequences in this case and then click on the button below to reveal the answer.

Button
Check answer
Answer: The employer has illegally used OSINT to make a decision about someone’s employment and had to pay a fine.

Slide 13
Using reliable sources of information
Technology changes rapidly, and new threats are always emerging. It is important to always use the most reliable information to determine if a threat is real or dangerous. The use of unreliable information can lead to false positives or false negatives.

Flashcard 1
False positive
A false positive is when the cyber professional is led to believe that there is a threat which is not really there. Investigating this false threat can be a waste of time and resources, it increases the amount of work for security teams and distracts the team from focusing on real threats. 

Flashcard 2
False negative
This is when unreliable information leads the cyber security team to believe there is no threat when there actually is one, or to overlook a threat that doesn’t appear to be dangerous. This increases the risk of loss or damage, and can reduce the team’s ability to respond to the attack, and in the event of a data breach, could lead to serious damage being done. A false negative could also be part of a highly sophisticated attack that is capable of evading prevention technologies.

Slide 14
Current threat status
Key term: ‘Threat status’ is the current level of malicious cyber activity and the potential for damage or disruption to a computer, network or system. ‘Threat modelling’ is a process that is used to identify potential security threats and vulnerabilities, determine the seriousness of each threat, and make recommendations on how to protect an organisation’s resources.
In order to determine the threat status, a process such as threat modelling is used. Click the tabs below to find out what threat models usually include.

Tab 1
Asset identification
This includes different computers, devices, software, networks and systems that are in use in an organisation.

Tab 2
Mitigation capabilities
This includes collecting information about the technology an organisation is using to protect, detect and respond to particular types of threat, and about the organisation’s security processes.

Tab 3
Risk assessment
This combines the risk of threat to the organisation’s assets with the organisation’s mitigation capabilities, to determine how likely it is that a particular type of attack will take place.

Tab 4
Threat mapping
This is a process that follows the potential path of threats through an organisation’s systems.

Slide 15
Case study
A new social media platform, ‘Talkative’ launched in 2020.
The platform’s main users are 13-21 year olds.
Talkative allows users to share photos and post status updates, send messages using a private chat, play games with other users, and make in-app purchases. 
The company keeps records of all posts and photos on a cloud server.
Their head office is in Manchester, and they employ 50 people.
All staff members have a staff pass on a lanyard which they use to enter the building, and have a company iPhone and laptop which they use to work remotely.
All staff have received an email outlining the best practice for cyber security, but the company did not check to make sure that everyone had read it and there was no mandatory IT security training.

Slide 16
Case study
Imagine that you are part of the Talkative security team. What are the current threats facing the organisation in terms of cyber security?
Type your thoughts into the box below.

Button
See our idea
How does your idea compare with this?
Data: The company keeps records of all posts and photos, so it is at risk from threat actors who want to steal data and insert ransomware. If data is stolen, they may face fines for being in breach of GDPR laws.
Laptop and phone: The staff can use their laptop and phone outside of work, so could be at risk of “shoulder surfing”, having data stolen because they are using an unsecure server, or even having their laptop and phone stolen.
Lanyard: Staff need a lanyard to enter the building, but not to move around once inside; once inside the building, a threat actor could roam at will.
Staff: The staff do not receive regular security training or updates, and their knowledge has not been checked.

Slide 17
Analysing cyber threat intelligence information
Key term: ‘Cyber threat intelligence’ is information about potential threats.
Determining the relevant cyber threat intelligence information requirements involves the following elements:
Understanding what the threat is.
Determining how the organisation can be attacked.
Assessing the vulnerability of the organisation.
Determining the information that may be required

Click the button below to explore a scenario.

Button
Scenario
Imagine that you are working for a business-to-consumer organisation that sells shoes online.
The company has a large number of suppliers and clients, and some of these are based in other countries.
There are 20 employees in the company, and they sometimes work remotely, using company laptops.
The company last had security training for all employees one year ago and it determined that staff did not pay much attention to security.
The company does not use firewalls, and updates their software once a month.

Before you move on to the next page, consider this question:
What are the cyber threat intelligence information requirements for different types of attack (e.g. phishing, ransomware, viruses and Denial of Service)?

Slide 18
Phishing
Click the buttons to learn about phishing attacks.

Button 1
What threat happens?
These attacks use social engineering to trick people into giving information.

Button 2
How the threat happens
Phishing attacks usually come from email, text, phone calls, or videoconferencing messages.

Button 3
How to assess the threat
Vulnerability to social engineering can come from inadequate training or processes, lack of firewalls and a lack of knowledge about recent types of phishing techniques.

Button 4
How to approach the threat
Phishing scams, are very hard to prevent through the use of antivirus software and firewalls. As a result, other types of threat intelligence methods are needed to catch phishing scams. These may include the collection and use of publicly-available records about domain owners.

Slide 19
Ransomware
Click the buttons to learn about ransomware attacks.

Button 1
What threat happens?
These attacks aim to steal data or encrypt a victim’s files. The attacker then demands a ransom, usually paid in Bitcoin, to restore the data.

Button 2
How the threat happens
Ransomware attacks may come from malware or by hacking into servers.

Button 3
How to assess the threat
Vulnerability to ransomware is similar to that from phishing.

Button 4
How to approach the threat
One way to find intelligence on these attacks is to go on the dark web and see what is being offered for sale. Cyber security professionals can scan these sites to find out what organisations have been breached and who may have had their data exposed.

Slide 20
DoS and DDoS attacks
Click the buttons to learn about Denial of Service (DoS) and Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks.

Button 1
What threat happens?
This type of attack uses malware or botnets to keep users from accessing a networked system, service, website, application, or other resource. The attack may make a system slow to respond, or it can disable the system entirely, preventing legitimate users from having access to a site or service.

Button 2
How the threat happens
Attacks usually come from malware or viruses.

Button 3
How to assess the threat
Organisations that have a public face (such as an e-tailer or government website) are particularly vulnerable to this type of attack, as are organisations that provide a vital service, such as utility companies.

Button 4
How to approach the threat
Threat intelligence information for DoS attacks may include monitoring people likely to launch an attack. Threat intelligence will also include keeping up with the latest types and methods of DoS and DDoS attacks and checking forums and messaging sites where these attacks may be organised.

Slide 21
Viruses
Click the buttons to learn about viruses.

Button 1
What threat happens?
Virus threats are similar to malware. Threat actors use viruses to steal data, to damage an organisation’s reputation, to damage equipment or to shut down services.

Button 2
How the threat happens
Viruses can be downloaded in software or software upgrades, or through phishing attacks. They can also sometimes move from one computer to another on the same network.

Button 3
How to assess the threat
Any organisation can be susceptible to a virus attack, but targeted virus attacks may be used against large multi-nationals, government organisations, and organisations in particular industries, such as healthcare or education.

Button 4
How to approach the threat
Information about the types of malware and viruses that are in circulation can be gathered from security and software providers, as well as from cyber security and hacker forums and the dark web. Malware databases can also be used to track viruses that may be a threat.

Slide 22
Quiz: Question 1
Which one of the following terms is used to describe information about changes in the threat landscape, such as information about a new or emerging type of threat?
Operational threat intelligence.
Tactical threat intelligence.
Social threat intelligence.
Strategic threat intelligence.

Correct answer: Strategic threat intelligence.

Slide 23
Quiz: Question 2
OSINT is a commonly used abbreviation for…
Operational state intelligence.
Organisational strategic intelligence.
Open source intelligence.
Only social intelligence.

Correct answer: Open source intelligence.

Slide 24
Quiz: Question 3
Select one option to complete this sentence:
Sources of OSINT data include online media, Census data, GPS data and…
Publicly-available records.
Private records.
Medical records.
Financial records.

Correct answer: Publicly-available records.

Slide 25
Quiz: Question 4
When a cyber professional is led to believe that there is a threat which is not really there, this is known as a…
False negative.
False positive.
False alarm.
True negative.

Correct answer: False positive.

Slide 26
Quiz: Question 5
Which one of the following terms is used for the process of identifying potential security threats and vulnerabilities, determining the seriousness of each threat and making recommendations on how to protect an organisation’s resources?
Threat intelligence.
Threat identification.
Threat monitoring.
Threat modelling.

Correct answer: Threat modelling.

Slide 27
Confidence check
During this Section, you have covered the following assessment criteria:
1.1 Identify key concepts of cyber threat intelligence.
1.2 Explain the following terms in relation to cyber security: threats, exploits, vulnerabilities, risks.
1.3 Describe the threat intelligence lifecycle.
1.4 Describe how to find out about emerging attack techniques and how to recognise them.
1.5 Consider what could be included in Open Source Intelligence data sets.
1.6 Explain why it is important to only use reliable and valid sources of Open Source Intelligence information.
1.7 Explain the importance of using reliable sources of information in relation to cyber security threats.
1.8 Consider the current threat status and make possible recommendations based upon cyber threat intelligence information.
1.9 Analyse relevant cyber threat intelligence information requirements for an organisation.

Please make sure you’re confident with your learning in all of these areas before you move on.

Slide 28
Section complete
Well done! You have completed Section 1: Understanding cyber threat intelligence.
In Section 2, you will learn all about threat models.